Hello, hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of
the Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes,
and today I'm joined by Doctor Sonia Conterra. She's
a full professor of biological physics at the University
of Oxford, and today we're going to talk about
her new book Six Problems that Science Cannot Solve
in the Original Spanish. It's Sa Problemasquelaciencia no puede
resolver. And Doctor Contero, welcome to the show. It's
a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. Thank you for the invitation. It's great
to be here.
So, I, I mean, we're going to get into
the 6 problems that you go through in the
book, but first of all, which criteria did you
use to select the 6 problems you claim science
cannot solve?
Well, of course, there's uh endless problems that science
cannot solve, um, but, uh, I think I was
trying to respond to, um, some of the fundamental
questions that physics starts, uh, in the 20th century
and that we struggle to solve, physics and biology,
mainly, and computer science. Uh, TRACK a bit their
origin and why, um, they're now so central to
everything that we do from quantum computers to artificial
intelligence to longevity or uh studies. Why are we
obsessed with these problems? And another reason. So maybe
I should say which the problems are. Uh, THE
problems are, uh, what is quantum mechanics? What is
its meaning? Uh, WHY can't we have a theory
of everything that unifies the big theories of the
cosmos, general relativity with quantum mechanics after 100 and
I don't know how, and, and why it still
obsesses us. Um, THE third one is origin of
life, which emerged naturally from these ones and again
becomes important. Uh, NOW we're looking for life in
other planets or people trying to make artificial life
on Earth. Still not solved problem. Then the 4th
comes naturally, the arrow of. Time, which is still
a mystery in physics, reappears in biology as aging,
and again, er, it is part of the narrative,
especially of these big techno oligarchs, which they are
telling us that we have to change the way
we understand biology and just focus on aging. And
uh more than biology, medicine, right? And this has
entanglement with AI use of data, and that brings
us to the next question, which is can we
really uh create really intelligent machines, um, and what
does it mean and why are we obsessed with
it, even if Cha GPT keeps telling us the
stupid things and obviously showing that it doesn't think
very well. And, and then, um, so the next
this brings Us to the big topic which I
think is of our time after um a long
chat. So uh if you want, uh, consciousness, the
concept of consciousness enter physics pretty much with quantum
mechanics with the problem of the observer. What does
it mean that we are never outside nature, that
there's always a subjective part that we need to
use language. To interpret things, you know, all these
ideas that in many cases came, I think, from
psychoanalysis. And then, uh, but as, as biology, uh,
was a little bit left behind, the, the topic
of consciousness, it was sort of even seen as
pseudoscience. But now because maybe of these intelligent machines
and because we want to transport ourselves, our consciousness
to other planets and so on. The problem of
consciousness is becoming not only very central to uh
computer science but also to neuroscience and all sorts
of activities. So I wanted to explore not only
the scientific problems, uh, in a kind of, but
also their history and put them a bit in
context of the last 100 years and what it
tells us about science.
Yeah, that's great. So let's start with uh quantum
mechanics. So in the book, you go a little
bit through the history of it and the kinds
of impact it has had on science and society.
So would you like to tell us about that?
Yeah, so at the beginning of the 20th century,
uh, so basically, uh, Einstein gives a theory of
general relativity in 1905, uh, so everybody realizes that
the world is not what it looks, time is
not what it looks, it can stretch or contract
just to keep the velocity of life constant, which
is a very weird thing to think about. Um,
AND then so physics starts to change. Um, IT'S
worth noticing that 1905 is also the year where
a European power, Russia lost the war to Japan.
It's the first time the Asian peril appears in
the Western conscience, uh. And um er yes, after
that, so physicists start with their experiments to be
able to reach the atom or, or what might
be the uh nuclear uh um the nucleus of
the atom made from, so it's the experiments of
Marie Curie and her husband of over a lot
of um of um radiation of um. Uh, HOW
do you say this, not radiation, um, yeah, the
radioactivity. Um, SO then also the big experiments to
smash the atoms, so using alpha particles, people start
smashing the atom and realize that the, there's these
electrons there and, and other problems, the black body
radiation, uh, uh, uh, Einstein, um. Uses it to
explain the photoelectric sets. So, basically, when you went
to the very, very core of very small, um
uh um parts of nature, the continuum broke, uh,
so you needed to explain some of the things
you were seeing with this concept of quantum. So
basically things have fixed energies, you cannot have all
the energies you want. And out of this uh
complicated uh experience came out all these uh theories
of, of quantum mechanics, first by Heisenberg and then
by uh Schrodinger with a famous uh uh uh
wave equation and tried to explain all these experiments
and it's become a very successful theory. The main
problem, uh, extremely successful, especially if you go with
very small part, very small amount of particles. The
main problem for it is that following quantum mechanics,
you come up with very weird predictions about nature.
Uh, THIS idea of things can be waves and
particles, or there's this principle of superposition, you can
be in all the states and only collapse in
one. WHEN you do an experiment, you cannot predict
what it will come out, you can only predict
a probability of what might come out and even
more weird, time does not behave in the same
way. Um, IN general relativity, we have this thing
which is our common sense, the, the idea on
which reason is based, which is, um, cause and
effect. Uh, IF you have a set of rules,
you can have time moving forward and you have
cause and effect. But in quantum mechanics it becomes
more complicated and it's barely much, uh, explained by
this, uh, phenomenon of entanglement. Uh, WHO is still,
uh, I mean, it's the basis of the modern
ideas of quantum cryptography, and it's this idea that
you, you get two particles generated at the same
time and you throw 11 away to the other
end of the universe. If I do an experiment
with this one here, I will know what happened
or what state is the other one. So this
seems to break with general relativity. So, and most
importantly, I think from a philosophical perspective, um, the
idea that how you do an experiment determines the
outcome, means that we can, so, um, we cannot,
uh, um Say that, um, you know, uh, subjectivity
is outside science. Uh, SO this came out, that's
what the interest of quantum physics on, uh, consciousness
and what does it mean to do a measurement,
and these are big mysteries as it is the
time. So, uh, yeah, and, and I think this
is the reason why now we're also making quantum
computers. I think we have to hope that if
we're able to make a machine out of all
this, uh, maybe that, that computes, uh, maybe we
learned something that escapes our, our just theoretical thinking,
but, um, there's no going back to the fracture
of quantum mechanics in the Western traditions of thinking.
And, uh, especially the Enlightenment, I wouldn't say Western
traditional thing, it's the Enlightenment, what we've been doing
for the last 300 years, and, and that's why
it still remains a, a central question.
So yeah, you've already mentioned the ways or why
quantum mechanics and general rela relativity conflict with one
another. Uh, DO you think it would be possible
to develop a theory of everything that unifies them,
and uh do we need such a theory?
Yeah, so since Einstein and Schrodinger, and this has
been an obsession of theoretical physics. Uh, Einstein did
not want to believe that the, at the bottom,
at the very small, uh, part constituents of nature,
there was a probabilistic, it was not like a
certainty, but, you know, breaks this idea, uh, of
determinism, which is a very Protestant idea, the idea,
the, the idea of predestination, you know, God knows
what is going to happen to you. There's no
freedom. I think this is a bit cultural background
and also German idealism. But, uh, so, um, but,
uh, so, the, the main problem is that in
general relativity, uh, uh, er, uh, um, gravity is
the curvature of space-time. It's, it's the space-time itself,
but in quantum mechanics, it doesn't match and quantum
mechanics would, is a very different ontology, if you
want, a very different framework. Um, AND, uh, sort
of wants to make that gravity, a space-time quantum
quantized, and, and, and that brings a lot of
problems for, for, for general relativity. Of course, the
European, or, or I would say, the Enlightenment tradition.
Tells you that the reason of what things happen
at higher scales, you have to find it in
the constituents, but it doesn't necessarily have to be
the case. I, I don't see for myself any
problem of nature having a kind of gap. A,
a kind of rupture between what happens on one
scale and what happens at other scales, and even
more, that er things at higher scale are able
to access those areas of lower scale to create
things like very complex behavior, um, like life. One
has to remember that we are made of constituents
like proteins or DNA or biopolymers which inhabit that
interface between the quantum and the classical and can
potentially habitate both spaces whenever it suits them. And
from there, for example, we would expect uh or
or would start to Uh, theorizeize or hypothesize why,
for example, the brain uses 2 watts, why chat
GPT and all these people need all the books
of the world and all the energy of the
world to be able to function. We don't function
like that. And going into quantum processes and using
quantum processes with much reduced the, the abilities or
the toolbox that biology could have to create this
amazing behavior. I think we are a little bit
too arrogant with nature and with biology, trying to
impose all these uh ideas. On it, but of
course it's very fruitful. I think I go through
um the theories of everything in the book and
um it's becoming a, a very fascinatingly uh active
area of research. Uh, SO, um, since, uh, and,
and that gives me in a way hopes for
the world. So, all these studies of fundamental problems
of physics were very much abandoned after the Second
World War, uh, when physics became just a geopolitical
tool to make atomic bombs or energy sources and,
and very practical, no, the only non-practical. Things were
happening or, or mainly in, in CERN with this
um standard model, which is, I also go through
in, in the book, how it came about. But
basically, all these fundamental questions about ontology, about what
is reality, about how we use it, the weirdness
of being alive, were forgotten. And especially um in,
in the neoliberal part of science, which starts with
the collapse of the Soviet Union when everything is
uh becomes per, uh how do you call it,
uh publish or perish, published all the time, not
having time to think, everything is metrics, right? There
comes a new branch of physics. It's not a
new branch, but it's becoming extremely uh more and
more important with this, this branch of uh physics
and philosophy, a philosophy of physics. There's currently quite
a lot of people thinking about these fundamental problems
and uh that gives me hope that maybe we
have again uh a. Uh, A less utilitarian physics,
uh, going ahead. So, um, yeah, that, that's, that's
a bit the summary of, of, of the theories
of everything. We still haven't broken out of this,
uh, obsession with theories of everything came out, the
most successful theory and the most beautiful theory of
physics, which is this standard model, which it starts
with the unification of the electromagnetic fields with quantum
mechanics, um, beautiful physics, which again, has a lot
of gaps in it, a lot of infinities that
physicists try to tame using this business of renormalization.
There, they don't seem to be so obsessed with
this having in complexity, incompleteness in their process. And,
and also This idea by Hermann Weil, um, a,
a friend of Einstein, who, who hit something amazing,
which is the idea that the symmetry of the
mathematics of these equations of quantum mechanics can give
us a clue about, um, this, uh, how, uh,
the elemental particles and how are they related to
the elemental forces. Uh, I think I try to
summarize a bit the history of this, uh, how,
how wonderful ideas came out of physics and, and
eventually crashed with a string theory, uh, which, which,
uh, remains, uh, a, a kind of big failure
of theoretical physics, haven't been able to, uh, unify
quantum mechanics with general relativity using these ideas of
symmetry with a string theory, uh, with a string
theory.
Do you think that human consciousness could play any
role here like Roger Penrose suggests?
Yeah, I think Roger Penrose has a a clever
proposition. Um, HE, he, he, he, he, he mentions
and, and very inspired by Godel. Godel was a
German mathematician at the same time, very active at
the same time a quantum mechanics, and, and, uh,
he was very obsessed with problems of logic. Again,
uh, this leads to this original, so basically, quantum
mechanics and, and, and computer science are joined at
from birth at the hip, right? So they were
born at the same time because this, as quantum
mechanics was defying logic. Uh, um, AND, and Godel
from his theorems of incompleteness, incompleteness was showing that,
uh, within a logical system in which all the
parts of that system are related by cause and
effect, this logical system. There are statements that you
cannot say they are true or not. So basically
there are limits of how much truth you can
know from a logical system. People became quite obsessed
to what is in the world, and what in
this world can be interpreted by logic and what
is outside logic, so Um, Penrose makes the argument
that even we know if a statement is true
or not, even if we don't follow, um, the,
these logical rules, that we know this, we're able
to interpret this, uh, uh, problems, no? So, it's
in physics, not in logic, and he argues that,
uh, um, consciousness is not a logical, uh, classical
process because things don't happen with cause and effect.
Um, AND that probably there's some physics underlying this,
um, that is helping us to create consciousness because
consciousness is, is all about being aware of many
things at the same time. I'm talking to you
and I remember I have to go here and
there are so unifying and a lot of conscious,
unconscious, again, this is all these Freudian ideas I
think that intermingle with all this consciously or unconsciously,
um. So, yeah, it's this idea that proteins or
the structures within the brain or in the body
or in, in whatever thing that becomes alive, um,
are able to access this quantum properties of a
scale, a very small scale that would allow us,
for example, for even a bacterium, maybe not conscious
but proto-conscious to As soon as it gets in
an envelope, you know, as an individual separated from
the universe, it feels itself as a, as an
individual. And even when, uh, what defines the individual
is the separation, right? So, it's all these old
philosophical questions that come out to physics and it
is highly likely that involves a quantum process and,
and Penrose puts forward this idea of orchestrated reduction.
In which we are able to hold a lot
of information in a sort of unconscious quantum state
and collapse it, so basically becoming uh something we
can work with logic, um, as, as, as a
biological process that we don't understand. So, um, he,
and I also think that it's highly likely that
quantum processes are involved in, in life, in general,
and also in consciousness.
Do you think that these issues in physics that
at least to a certain extent seem unsolvable, tell
us something about the limits of our cognition?
Not only about, maybe of our way we're trying
to do the limits of the current um paradigm
of science in which we think we use reason
to study all the steps. Um, I think we
actually don't. For example, in the, I think the
areas of science in general that have had more
progress in the last 10 years, for example, are
areas where we don't know what is going on.
One of them is synthetic biology. We can get
a bacterium or a yeast. This is beautiful from
the work of David Baker, for example, they designed
a protein that does not exist in nature. They
put a DNA ring inside this uh organisms and
produce a protein, not, not easy, not all proteins
work. I'm not saying this is a factory, but
we can do that. I mean, people can do
that. That does not exist in nature using a
black box. I mean, we understand roughly some of
the processes that the cell does in order to
produce proteins. That's why we can hack into its
machinery, but the actual details of how it does
it doesn't work. So if you what happens with
um these LLMs and, and this uh um. Artificial
intelligence based on, on, uh, this deep, deep learning
neural network, all these, uh, um, things that are
able to produce videos or they're able to talk,
basically. Uh, uh, NEURAL networks are also a black
box. We don't know what is happening inside them,
and only when they gave them this freedom of
doing things we don't know and we cannot control,
this thing has started to talk a bit more
realistically. And in the early models, and some models
also use noise, so they were approximating biological processes,
statistical processes, going again to this idea that probability
more than certainty is important for create biological-like behavior.
Um, IT is, is again being revealed. And another
example I could give you of things that we
cannot control. For years, people were trying. To cure
cancer, targeting a specific proteins of a specific protein
uh uh processes, then they became a bit more
sophisticated and they were trying to get a few
more at the same time because the cell is
very smart and is able to, uh, overcome all
these medications. Um, BUT in the last years, we've,
we, our, the thing that works best is, um,
immunotherapy. So basically we're trying to train the immune
system to get rid of cancer. Uh, WITH modern
vaccines and so on and so forth, but, um,
we don't know how it does it. So, um,
I think, um, mm, basically we, we tell this
narrative that that science is a very logical process,
actually it isn't, uh, we try to formalize the
mathematics, but most of the practical science aren't, um,
and, and, um. So, basically, I think um this
insurmountable problems also come from this idea that we
need to understand all the steps and maybe, and
that's why we make things with them, in fact,
when we fail, We try to create technologies like
quantum computers. I don't know how it really works,
but maybe if I managed to make something with
it, with my roots, I start to figure out
what can I do with it, it tells me
a bit how it works. So, the process of
knowledge, we use all sorts of ways into understanding
how something works. And yes, one for me, all
these fundamental questions I put in the book, for
me, the interesting thing is that in a world
without sort of religion, uh, post the sort of
enlightenment world, Uh, we, they bring us to fundamental
questions about the origin of, of us, our identity,
what are we? What is the universe that I
think we need? Um, WE need as humans, even
if we cannot solve them. I think part of
being alive is actually sitting on these problems that
we cannot solve, um, which I talk a lot
about this idea of sitting on the cracks of
knowledge, right? Um, uh, THIS has always been very
productive and also it's a recognition that, uh, consciousness
also emerges from this crack with the, with the
universe. Um, THE stories we tell to become a
unity are also our needs. We need them, uh,
in order to be individuals. So, it brings all
these, uh, contradictions, tensions being cracked that, uh, philosophy
everywhere, not only in the West, also in Asia
and everywhere have been talking about for thousands of
years.
So let's talk a little bit about the life
then, so because you explore topics regarding life and
its origins in your book as well. One big
question is, what is life? Do you think we
can answer that?
Well, again, it's this idea of holding nature with
a word and trying to nature obey our word,
life, you know, nature. It doesn't work like that.
It's more, it's more fun, again, it's probabilistic in
many ways, so it just comes up with stuff
that roughly look at something. But since in our
language, we cannot describe these fuzzy problems, we give
them a name, and there is something behind this
name. I mean, if Uh, I'm not a Platonist.
I don't believe that this, this ideal forms, uh,
um, but yeah, life, I mean, life is a
big mystery emerges in life as far as we
know about, uh, 400, 4 billion years ago or
even a bit more, 4. 5, the universe is
13.4, something like this billion years old, so quite
a lot of the age of the universe, almost
a third has been used by life and evolution,
so we, we often forget that. So the life
on Earth emerges pretty early in the Earth, in
Earth, on Earth, and it's um. Big mystery where
it comes from. We know what it's made of,
uh, it, it seems to, we, we have all
these molecules at the nanoscale that assemble in very
complex systems, going against the second principle of thermodynamics,
uh, which tells you everything. Thing should increase entropy,
but life manages to reduce its entropy by understanding
somehow um its environment and created these life forms
and the big mystery is how all these molecules
became one. In, in an individual like bacterium or
archaea or whatever, right? So it's a big mystery,
we have no idea. So people I go through
the book are trying to, have been looking for
life and, and they're sort of finding the primordial
soup for a very long time, especially after the
arrival of molecular biologists, after the war, after the
Second World War. And there's now a lot of
people trying to replicate the origins of life in
computers using AI, uh, sort of using robotic systems.
So far no success, uh, I mean, it's interesting,
uh, but I mean Craig Venter is trying to,
or claims he has claimed he had made artificial
life, which is not such. Basically he got a
bacterium. That already exists in exchange for a DNA
that is artificial and is still alive and replicates,
but basically, he is using the machinery of the
cell that is already there. If anything, what is
proven is that DNA is not so central to
life as some people like to think it's central,
but what matters is the cell, not the DNA
you have inside. Uh, AGAIN, this reductionism of trying
to explain everything by the constituents that comes again,
um, in the 1950s. I go through a little
bit in the, uh, uh, book, and then, um,
yeah, there, there's, there's something great going on at
the moment which is this incredible new telescopes, uh,
that, that are Have been deployed in space and
they are letting us look much, much, much, much
deeper, uh, like the James Webb, uh, telescope, that
is amazing, the amount of information you can get
from it, and I think that's gonna be the
new Vera Rubin, uh, telescope that is gonna be
in Chile and the Trump administration continues funding. So
this is not part of any cut, um, made
in Spain, uh, the telescope, um, by a Spanish
company, uh, which is also interesting. Um, BUT these
new telescopes are allowing us to see or predict
and the composition. Or, or measure the composition of,
of uh planets, of the atmosphere of planets very
far away from us in a combination of great
technology, as of observational technology and also a very
good data analysis. So people are starting to make
great um Uh, um, hypothesis about, oh my God,
will that planet have life or not based on
this hint information we, we are getting. But, um,
there's new, um, uh, I think missions planned for
Venus, uh, uh, because people also have found that
there's some forms of, uh, chemically modified DNA that
survives in sulfuric acid. So it brings back the
question, but this question never leaves us. Are we
alone in the universe? Uh, WHAT is life? And,
and I think we need it and I think
it's important and I think we'll continue doing it,
um, at, at whatever is, is a very human
need.
But how likely do you think that there is
life and particularly intelligent life on other planets?
So, you know, there's all sorts of theories of
this because, you know, by your log thinking you
can reach any conclusion. Uh, MANY people think that,
you know, it must be. You know, homogeneously distributed
if, if it's encoded in somehow the rules of
the universe that things like us, or at least
bacteria emerge in, in the universe, there must be
somewhere else, and this is why people are looking
at Mars or, or uh the moons, the icy
moons, Europa, uh, but uh so far, uh, we
haven't got any luck. We have found in meteorites,
um. Uh, CONSTITUENTS of proteins, amino acids, so it
makes people think that the chemistry of life sort
of happens in certain conditions in space, um, but,
uh, we haven't found any and we don't know,
um, and this is again a big mystery, are
we really, really special? There was something really lucky
or improbable happened on Earth and what does it
mean? I have no opinion, um. I used to
think that you, I, I, I don't know, uh,
uh, I, I, I don't have any opinion about
this. I think it's a very open question.
Um, IN regards to aging. I mean, how do
you approach such a question of what aging is
and uh what do you think about the most
dominant approaches to anti-aging that we have or that
people are pursuing?
I think this is a. From a molecular biology
framework, which is basically, I call it rational utilitarian
in the most uh Anglosphere tradition that everything is
made of constituents and then there's cousin uh uh
uh Sort of in a simple way and with
the constituents break uh there is a way to
fix them and then that's it uh we, we
come up with these therapies which is the idea
that you know as we grow older DNA has
damaged and some therapists are trying to uh remove
the age of DNA. This is uh a bit
the, the, the work of Alto's lab, um, paid
I think by um. Uh, Bezos, uh, and there
is, uh, Juan Carlos Espulua is, uh, is trying,
is, is leading this idea that they want to
revert, uh, cells to a sort of pre, uh,
almost a stem cell or young, um, uh, state
by, uh, removing some of the tags you have
in DNA. But again, what does that mean? Will
that produce more cancer? Uh, WE don't know. Uh,
THEN other people say, OK, the damage comes because
mitochondria, which are producing the energy of the cell,
maybe produced too much because as you grow old,
the machinery to get rid of this extra energy
is not there anymore, and people are trying to
improve the membranes of mitochondria. This is another thing.
There is another one, there's rapamycin, which is about
controlling the immune system, but again, If you control
or diminish the immune system, are you gonna die
of cancer? Many of these therapies have always this
problem because in humans, uh, cancer is always there
lurking in the dark. The cells can revert or,
or get distracted to the normal state and produce
a tumor, and this is very much entangled with
the way the immune system works or, or some
of these processes work. Another one is the telome
uh uh uh sort of as, as. As as
we grow old, the, the ends of the chromosomes
become, uh, which are called telomeres, become shorter and
people are thinking that we can interfere with telomerase
to increase uh longevity. However, this was before. A
research for cancer because it's known that the length
of the telomeres has also been changing cancer. So,
um, people are looking at this uh molecular, uh,
um, uh, targets and it's good for the model
we have. It's a very capitalistic neoliberal model in
which each company has a bit of a different
approach so they can compete with each other. And
tell you this is the best. And then, um,
yeah, one of the good things that is happening
in these operations, well, the, the, there is this
thing that for the big technological companies is good
because they can use the powers of AI to
find targets and so on in all the publicly
available databases of biology and so on. So it's
an opportunity for this. Companies that really love monopoly,
they want the monopoly of their phone, they want
the monopoly of shopping, they want the monopoly of
finance, and now they want the monopoly of medicine
using these ideas of longevity because they use AI
for looking for targets and, and so on and
so forth. One good thing that is happening that
these companies are going because longevity is a kind
of foraging. It's a kind of new research framework,
um, allows them to go to traditional, more conservative
biology uh frameworks did not go before. And one
good thing, for example, is that they're using AR
or physicists or mathematicians to do these complex models
in which there's more interconnection. So, something interesting may
come. Out of, out of this. But of course,
as a physic of the things we're, we're talking
before, the main thing of life emerges in the
universe is because it's able to create order out
of the tension of the, of the tendency of
the universe to create disorder. So life emerges from
already a contradiction. In order, in order to create
order, we need to dissipate energy. And as we
create this order, in order to maintain it, it
needs to adapt to the environment and change to
the environment, creating this kind of entanglement of the
environment through its shape. The shape of a protein
that makes it stable is a, is a shape
that contains the information of the environment in an
analog form. So biology combines these digital ideas of
the sequence and all that with analog, and in
this analog form it is able to combine physics,
chemistry, biochemistry, digital, analog, physics, biology, and emerge and
as it dissipates energy in order to keep order
and basically moves the time. Uh, ARROW forward. If
we, if nothing of this were happening, we were
just dispersing in the universe as particles, really, or
if, or, or a static, time would not pass.
With a meaningful time for us is the time
that we control in order to create this cause
and effect processes that allowed us to communicate or
become alive. So from that perspective, being alive is
aging, emerges because aging is the kind of the,
the result of the contradiction of order and disorder
in the universe. Again, these gaps, uh, that's why
I'm not afraid of the gap of quantum and
classical because we emerge from contradictions, forces that look
in different directions and how we use this thermodynamic
economy of the whole thing, how we use energy
to overcome this different process. So, basically, being alive
is using time and, and being alive means damage
in your structure. Of course, some very simple organisms.
Live for a very long time. There's, uh, they
have a slow metabolism, so they don't, for example,
some, um, I think there are some jellyfish or
something that they really live for a very long
time, almost 10 because they keep substituting the broken.
Pieces, but of course they don't seem to have
identities like we have, uh, um, the, the, the
simple organisms don't develop tumors. Um, FOR humans seems
very difficult, although of course we can improve longevity.
Again. Uh, THE contradiction of our time. In a
time when the United States, for example, the, um,
life expectancy is going down because people cannot access
free healthcare or, or affordable healthcare. We're just obsessed
with uh living longer, really, and, and what kind
of life um are we gonna have like hooked
on Instagram as the big powers are, are attacking
each other. I mean, it's all very contradictory what
is happening these days and, and I also think.
That many of these things are used as small
screens. They are problems that we're interested in. They
put them in front of us and they distract
us from the actual important things that are going
on.
So I, I want to ask you about uh
artificial intelligence now. Um, CAN we create truly intelligent
machines? I mean, what does it mean for a
machine or what would it mean for it to
be truly intelligent?
I think to be true intelligence is to understand
a bit the effects that it's going to cause,
to be ethical. Uh, WHICH is what we don't
have. I mean, basically we have machines that churn
things, they do clever things like, uh, I mean,
clever as if able to calculate things or create
a video or recognize things, but, um, it does
not have the capacity, it's not conscious, therefore there's
no ethics. The consciousness emerges not as individuals. When
they look at other individuals, uh, so basically, I
am what I am because I see someone in
front of me that I recognize as someone like
me or other individuals in this universe. So, so
from there, that's why the, the term consciousness also
means in common speech ethics or, or moral behavior
because recognize myself, I have to recognize you. Therefore,
there is an ethics coming out and it's very
complex. Ethics as is as complicated as, as physics
or more, you know, what is ethical behavior? What,
what if I'm doing is good or bad, um,
you know, we've been in this problem, uh, all,
all history of humanity is based on this, right?
There's all sorts of things and AI cannot make
any of these judgments. What I mean, I don't
know if you, you chat with Claude or, or
Chad DBT they just turn. A lot of rubbish
that makes sense, and speaks quite well, it's able
to do grammar and all this is fascinating. I
disagree with some people that they say they do
it in the same way we are, we do
it because the main key is that in order
to speak, you just need to speak to your
mother when you're a baby and learn from others
or in order to read, you just need a
book of 40 pages or less, and this engines
basically need all the books in the world and,
and listening to all the conversations including your phone
and so on. Uh, SO it's, it's not exactly
the same. So, yeah, no, our machines are dangerous.
I'm not saying they're not dangerous because they're being
used, uh, for example, to give you a job
or not based on your CV or even worse
on these drones that are deployed in war zones
to identify or misidentify people using your phone or
using how you breathe. I mean, they've been collecting
our data in, in the phones, um. And now
they're used them to kill people or I foresee
very soon uh for increasingly totalitarian behavior, not just
from governments but probably from uh these alliances of
big tech companies, uh, which is becomes a kind
of new feudalism or new East India Company or
something worse, you know, so they're dangerous. I'm not
saying they're not clever, but they're not intelligent. Yet,
uh,
and when it comes to the issue of, uh,
consciousness, I mean, what do you think about the
ways that people have been scientifically trying to tackle
consciousness and why do you think that our explorations
of consciousness are so important?
So the, the main problem, one of the main
problems has nothing to do with intelligent machines. It's
basically medical. You, you have someone in the hospital
and you don't know if they're conscious or not.
Many of these patients in in the hospital might
be lying back, they don't feel pain, they don't
see, they don't blink, but some of them, they
just come back and they're conscious again. And so
that brings this huge ethical problem of can we
decide if someone Is, is really um has consciousness
or not. We don't know where consciousness comes from.
People have been studying for a very long time
brain waves and so on and so forth in
hibernation state, in anesthesia, in, in, in, and it's
still. We don't know where it comes from. So
people um are interested in this, so I mentioned
Kriek and Koch that started very much, uh, yeah,
I, I don't know, after, after Crie got the
Nobel Prize, probably was the 1950s, 1960s, must have
been 1960s, 1970s. I start to look for a
place in the brain that will hold consciousness. So
far, no success, even though many people have been
putting a lot of effort in this. So, there's
been several theories. One of, of the most popular
one is this global neuronal working space theory, which
is this idea that Some information is in some
parts of the body and somehow breaks this isolation
and becomes sort of general, again, um people are
trying to simulate this in computers and so on,
uh, we don't know. Another very popular theory is
this IIT by Giulio Tononi integrated information theory. Which
more or less says that everything is sort of
proto-conscious and we have a kind of density of
this subs of this consciousness. It's about complexity, it's
about geometry. Again, uh, Giulio Toon has been trying
to use it in a medical context, but um,
I still we don't know. So there are many
theories, uh, theories that try to say that we
need the, the, the brain needs to think itself,
all, all sorts of meta-representations, all sorts of things
and So there are many at the moment from
emerging computer science and neuroscience, and recently, Uh, they
were afraid in this field that everybody was coming
with their own theory and they made a kind
of, uh, international competition, uh, adversarial collaboration they call
it, in which people will try to prove one
or other theory true or not. Again, I didn't
come up with any, um. Win any, any success.
Uh, SO it's still a hot topic. We don't
know where it's going. Um, OF course, there's the
theory of consciousness of, of Roger Penrose, that somehow
there is this idea that is fascinating that there,
the, the quantum collapse. According to Roger Penrose, things
become sort of, uh, uh, real world away from
quantum mechanics when sort of Uh, uh, gravity collapses
them into real, into real as in not quantum,
as of general relativity real, and, and others, um,
yeah, I mean, other people think that it's a
consciousness field that collapses, uh, these processes. So, very
much open and, and I, I, I find it
also fascinating how people working in robotics are actually
trying to avoid consciousness. They want robots that simulate
consciousness, uh, so they can work for you as
waiters and so on, but they're robots, they're not
conscious. So, um, and for them it's also interesting,
these theories of, of consciousness. So it's fascinating how
this field that was treated as pseudoscience for decades
after the war and now it's come back, um,
and again, we don't know what it's gonna bring
us, but, um, I think it's good. THAT we
think about this because in many ways, because of
this robots start and these companies that are trying
to control our lives, um, being able to think,
to think independently, to, to reflect on what is
human consciousness becomes important, especially because All these, uh,
devices we use and all our lives and the
jobs and everything fracture our consciousness. Um, WE, we,
we're not able to have a unified feeling of
ourselves and hence people are very interested in meditation
and all these things. Um, SO it's an important
topic because modern life, sort of the enlightenment. Has
fractured our consciousness even though it started as, you
know, we, uh, uh, a cogito, right, the, the
car, although I, I, I argue that it's not
the car that this actually comes from the Spanish
um uh Siglo de Oro, we call it the
golden age of, of Spanish literature. And I think
these problems of modernity and of consciousness came from
both sides. On the one side, Cervantes, uh, the
idea that you are, uh, go through the world
without God, and, and that idealism crushes you. That's
a very Spanish, uh, thought of the. Um, uh,
OF the Spanish, uh, literature of the time and
also Teresa de Avila, which I mentioned her, uh,
who wrote the first book, very obsessed with this,
um, it's very likely that uh Las Moradas, the
lodgings or whatever is translated in English, which is,
um, An exploration of consciousness and unconsciousness through medi
through, through, uh, through going away, no, in the
search for God, um, and, and I think uh
it's very likely that Dec read the book because
his books, uh, his book on, on consciousness also
on the uh uh on the cogito is very
based on the structure of Teresa de Avila's book.
So I think it's a fascinating topic that links,
um, to the beginning of the Enlightenment. And, and,
and following the history of consciousness, I think is
a, is a fascinating topic.
So I have 2 more questions, 2 general questions
just to wrap up our conversation. You've already been,
uh, telling us about this throughout our conversation, but
what does the fact that these questions, these 6
problems that you chose to tackle in your book,
remain unanswered? What do they tell us about science?
Because we have thought of science as something reliant
on, on, on rational, logical. Understanding of reality. So
basically trying to look at a world that is
complex and chaotic and try to match it to
a machine, something that works with cause and error,
and this is not how reality works, not only
because of quantum mechanics, but of probabilistic processes because
of complex systems, we have behaviors that go outside
logic. And we have overcome this problem in, in,
in many ways. One is sort of working in
analog, learning by making. I, I already said some
working with things that we don't really understand. Um,
BUT, um, I think for us, for the Enlightenment
people has always been very difficult to admit that,
um, this lack of control that even though we
have fixed laws of nature, which we don't know.
Um, DOES not necessarily have to lead to a
deterministic outcomes. Uh, WE don't know, uh, the importance
of the universe is this contingency. Things that happen
locally because of all these contradictions that bring the
most interesting things in the universe, order and disorder,
gaps, inconsistency, and things that can go outside logic.
And, um, although practicing, I'm an experimentalist, scientists, we
work with those. Um, FOR theoretical frameworks has been
very difficult. So we are trying to mechanize the
world through our computers and so on, but the
world doesn't let us. We're heating it up, global
warming, all these messes we're creating. So I, in
the book, I keep saying that we need to
find a way, um, I think it's linked also
with the way we use rationality to exploit nature
and to exploit others. The colonialist history and so
on, and in this moment of crisis, I think
has good things which allows us to, I mean,
eventually this emerges because um the model of colonialism
is just sort of breaking apart and we need
to have a science that I think I say
in the book that not only knows and controls
but goes along. Accompany the processes um that is
more humble, that is able to become more analog,
more accepting of how things are more realistic, more
accepting the limits of things, and above all, forget
all this Darwinian, uh Hovetian competition for uh uh
superiority of a hegemony that doesn't seem to leave
us since we started the Enlightenment. Um, WE need
to go back to, we need to find other
ways because otherwise we'll destroy each other. We have
atomic weapons that will allow us to destroy each
other. So I think the big planetary crisis is
inviting science to be more practical, more human, less,
uh, utilitarian in the sense of, uh, making money,
um, and, and more human. I don't know if
we're gonna do it or not, but, uh. This
cannot continue anymore. Uh, WE see it with the
extreme climate events, we've been having them in Spain
and Portugal, it's been crazy, all these rains. Uh,
WE have them also in the UK, this nonstop
raining, and it's just gonna get worse because there's,
there's a lot of humid air in the hot
atmosphere, in a chaotic movement, we're breaking the equilibriums
that allow us to compensate all these contradictions I
was saying before. So, life emerges in a very
fragile state. We only have one Earth. We cannot
colonize Mars at the moment and um so that,
that's inviting us to do another science um and
to discuss these issues, yeah.
Yeah, you've already ended up sort of answering my
last question, but, uh, uh, I'm going to ask
it anyways just to know if you have anything
more to say about it. But, uh, in what
ways do you look at the relationship between science
and politics?
Well, it's very central. Basically, the hegemony of the
West could have not happened without the industrial revolution,
without the mechanization of nature. Without the weapons. So,
basically, scientists, we like to say we are great
and we think of progress. This progressivism, in my
opinion, is also very problematic. But actually, what has
made physics important was the Manhattan Project and in
the First World War, chemistry became important because it
was created the first weapons of mass destruction. So,
uh, and, and then we have the economic power
in a way, um, all these geopolitical wars are
coming, biology is central to all these things, vaccine
can be good, but now we're, we're seeing increasing
reports of, of course, the people that make the
vaccines are also. Usually the people that are making
biological weapons. So, um, in a, in a world
with just power, might is right, hegemony, and money
are the ideology, science has become part of it.
I mean, we, we are not. Allowed it's a
fascinating topic, for example, why in Europe we don't
have AI, you know, because we were not allowed
to, um, you know, all this science is entangled
with the money that pays for it. Um, THIS
idea that science is neutral is ridiculous because basically
in the end what matters is how it is
deployed in the real world. And even if I
have very good intentions in the lab, I mean,
the people that pay me are the ones that
are going to decide what we use my inventions
for, so, um, Uh, science is, is entangled with
the whole operation of hegemony, uh, but now, of
course, we have new players in the field, China,
uh, and first Japan, but Japan has been, uh,
you know, Japan, they call themselves the Far West
for historical reasons. They're very much linked to the
Western world, also Korea, but we have a country
that has made a massive investment in science. And
it's doing it for other purposes, um, uh, and
it's doing it in another way, which is China.
So now everything is sort of crumbling and, um,
we don't know where uh in a moment that
not only Europe and the US were being industrialized,
uh, to send all our industries to China because
we thought we could control them, whatever they were
thinking. Um, IN a way, um, also they did
not invest in R&D heavily in Germany, which they
live on cars, they don't have electric cars. What
are you guys doing? Were you financialization this financialization
of the economy, this idea that uh you don't
reinvest all your profits in, in new ways of
production, not having an industrial capitalism, but a finance
capitalism. So all this is entangled with science, with
computers, with technology. Uh, WITH all the mess we
live in now. So, yeah, I mean, uh, but,
but scientists, I'm sorry to say they're not rebels,
uh, they, most of them, they just go along.
I mean, uh, we just go where the money
is. We have this, uh, so you can see
that in the Manhattan Project, for example, only one
person wrotebla, which I mentioned him in the book.
Left the Manhattan Project even though it was becoming
clear that Germany was not able to make the
atomic bomb, which was the, the, the, the motivation
for making the bomb. All of them continued apart
from Robbla, um, because they were, and then they
were pushed aside. Thank you very much, here's the
bomb, off you go. We don't need you anymore.
Um, YEAH, scientists go with the money, um, in
most cases, we're not rebels, so we will have
to expect that others in society. Will change things
so we can adapt to them. Science has never
been, in some cases, um, has been more rebellious,
um, but uh usually it's not very rebellious.
Great. So Doctor Guntero, let's end on that note,
and the book is again 6 Problems that Science
Cannot solve. There it is in the Spanish version.
Yeah,
I'm hoping it will come in English soon. Um,
I'm talking my publisher told me he's talking to
a few, um, companies that are interested in, in
translating it, but yeah, I was my Bad Bunny
moment. Let's write it in Spanish, not in English,
right?
Yeah, sure. So, uh thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a real pleasure to talk with you.
No, no, great. Thank you for the interview. Great.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herz Agnon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and
Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel,
Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego
Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro,
Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank
Lucas Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.